The American Revolution (1765–1783) was an ideological and political movement in the Thirteen Colonies in what was then British America. The revolution culminated in the American Revolutionary War, which was launched on April 19, 1775, in the Battles of Lexington and Concord. Leaders of the American Revolution were colonial separatist leaders who, as British subjects, initially sought incremental levels of autonomy but came to embrace the cause of full independence and the necessity of prevailing in the Revolutionary War to obtain it. The Second Continental Congress, which represented the colonies and convened in present-day Independence Hall in Philadelphia, formed the Continental Army and appointed George Washington as its commander-in-chief in June 1775, and unanimously adopted the Declaration of Independence the following year, which inspired, formalized, and escalated the war. For most of the eight-year war, its outcome appeared uncertain. But in 1781, a decisive victory by Washington and the Continental Army in the Siege of Yorktown inspired King George III and the British to negotiate an end to colonial rule in the colonies and acknowledge their independence, which was codified in the Treaty of Paris in 1783, leading to the establishment of the sovereign United States of America.

Discontent with colonial rule began shortly after the defeat of France in the French and Indian War in 1763. Even though the colonies had fought in and supported the war, British Parliament imposed new taxes to compensate for wartime costs and turned control of the colonies' western lands over to the British officials in Montreal. Representatives from several colonies convened the Stamp Act Congress in 1765; its "Declaration of Rights and Grievances" argued that taxation without representation violated their rights as Englishmen. In 1767, tensions flared again following British Parliament's passage of the Townshend Acts. In an effort to quell the mounting rebellion, King George III deployed British troops to Boston, where British troops killed protesters in the Boston Massacre on March 5, 1770. In 1772, anti-tax demonstrators destroyed the Royal Navy customs schooner Gaspee off present-day Warwick, Rhode Island. On December 16, 1773, in a seminal event in the American Revolution's escalation, Sons of Liberty activists wearing costumes of Native Americans instigated the Boston Tea Party, during which they boarded and dumped chests of tea owned by the British East India Company into Boston Harbor. London responded by closing Boston Harbor and enacting a series of punitive laws, which effectively ended self-government in Massachusetts but also served to expand and intensify the revolutionary cause.

In late 1774, 12 of the Thirteen Colonies sent delegates to the First Continental Congress, which met inside Carpenters' Hall in Philadelphia; the Province of Georgia joined in 1775. The First Continental Congress began coordinating Patriot resistance through underground networks of committees. Following the Battles of Lexington and Concord, Washington and the Continental Army responded by surrounding Boston, forcing the British to withdraw by sea in March 1776, and leaving Patriots in control in every colony. In August 1775, King George III proclaimed Massachusetts to be in a state of open defiance and rebellion.

In 1776, the Second Continental Congress began debating and deliberating on the Articles of Confederation, an effort to establish a self-governing rule of law in the Thirteen Colonies. On July 2, they passed the Lee Resolution, affirming their support for national independence, and on July 4, 1776, they unanimously adopted the Declaration of Independence, authored primarily by Thomas Jefferson, which embodied the political philosophies of liberalism and republicanism, rejected monarchy and aristocracy, and famously proclaimed that "all men are created equal".

The Revolutionary War continued for another five years during which France ultimately entered the war, supporting the colonial cause of independence. On September 28, 1781, Washington, with support from Marquis de Lafayette, the French Army, and French Navy, led the Continental Army's most decisive victory, capturing roughly 7,500 British troops led by British general Charles Cornwallis during the Siege of Yorktown, leading to the collapse of King George's control of Parliament and consensus in Parliament that the war should be ended on American terms. On September 3, 1783, the British signed the Treaty of Paris, granting their former colonies nearly all the territory east of the Mississippi River and south of the Great Lakes. About 60,000 Loyalists migrated to other British territories in Canada and elsewhere, but the great majority remained in the United States. With its victory in the American Revolution, the United States became the first constitutional republic in world history founded on the consent of the governed and the rule of law.

Origins
For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the American Revolution.

A 1775 map of Eastern North America, including the Province of Quebec, the Thirteen Colonies on the Atlantic Coast, and the Indian Reserve as defined by the Royal Proclamation of 1763. The border between the red and pink areas represents the 1763 Proclamation line, and the orange area represents Spanish colonial claims.
Under the British policy of salutary neglect, Britain traded with the colonies but otherwise mostly left them alone over the first 150 years of the colonies’ existence. The colonists became accustomed to running their own affairs, and they liked it. This British policy changed significantly after the French and Indian War, prompting the Thirteen Colonies to seek greater autonomy from Britain. After the Revolution, one colonist, Capt. Levi Preston, of Danvers, Massachusetts, was asked why the Americans rebelled against England, responded, "…we always had governed ourselves, and we always meant to. They didn’t mean we should."[1]

1651–1763: Early seeds
Further information: Colonial history of the United States
The Thirteen Colonies were established in the 17th century as part of the English Empire, and they formed part of the British Empire after the union of England and Scotland in 1707.[2] The development of a unique American identity can be traced to the English Civil War (1642–1651) and its aftermath. The Puritan colonies of New England supported the Commonwealth government responsible for the execution of King Charles I. After the Stuart Restoration of 1660, Massachusetts did not recognize Charles II as the legitimate king for more than a year after his coronation. In King Philip's War (1675–1678), the New England colonies fought a handful of Native American tribes without military assistance from England, thereby contributing to the development of a uniquely American identity separate from that of the British people.[3]

In the 1680s, Charles and his brother, James II, attempted to bring New England under direct English control.[4] The colonists fiercely opposed this, and the Crown nullified their colonial charters in response.[5] In 1686, James finalized these efforts by consolidating the separate New England colonies along with New York and New Jersey into the Dominion of New England. Edmund Andros was appointed royal governor and tasked with governing the new Dominion under his direct rule. Colonial assemblies and town meetings were restricted, new taxes were levied, and rights were abridged. Dominion rule triggered bitter resentment throughout New England.[6] When James tried to rule without Parliament, the English aristocracy removed him from power in the Glorious Revolution of 1688.[7] This was followed by the 1689 Boston revolt, which overthrew Dominion rule.[8][9] Colonial governments reasserted their control after the revolt. The new monarchs, William and Mary, granted new charters to the individual New England colonies, and local democratic self-government was restored.[10][11]

After the Glorious Revolution in 1688, the British Empire was a constitutional monarchy with sovereignty in the King-in-Parliament. Aristocrats inherited seats in the House of Lords, while the gentry and merchants controlled the elected House of Commons. The king ruled through cabinet ministers who depended on majority support in the Commons to govern effectively.[12] British subjects on both sides of the Atlantic proudly claimed the unwritten British constitution, with its guarantees of the rights of Englishmen, protected personal liberty better than any other government.[13] It served as the model for colonial governments. The Crown appointed a royal governor to exercise executive power.[14] Property owners elected a colonial assembly with powers to legislate and levy taxes, but the British government reserved the right to veto colonial legislation.[12] Radical Whig ideology profoundly influenced American political philosophy with its love of liberty and opposition to tyrannical government.[15]

With little industry except shipbuilding, the colonies exported agricultural products to Britain in return for manufactured goods. They also imported molasses, rum, and sugar from the British West Indies.[16] The British government pursued a policy of mercantilism in order to grow its economic and political power. According to mercantilism, the colonies existed for the mother country's economic benefit, and the colonists' economic needs took second place.[17] In 1651, Parliament passed the first in a series of Navigation Acts, which restricted colonial trade with foreign countries. The Thirteen Colonies could trade with the rest of the empire but only ship certain commodities like tobacco to Britain. Any European imports bound for British America had to first pass through an English port and pay customs duties.[18] Other laws regulated colonial industries, such as the Wool Act 1698, the Hat Act 1731, and the Iron Act 1750.[19][20]

Colonial reactions to these policies were mixed. The Molasses Act 1733 placed a duty of six pence per gallon upon foreign molasses imported into the colonies. This act was particularly egregious to the New England colonists, who protested it as taxation without representation. The act increased the smuggling of foreign molasses, and the British government ceased enforcement efforts after the 1740s.[21] On the other hand, certain merchants and local industries benefitted from the restrictions on foreign competition. The limits on foreign-built ships greatly benefitted the colonial shipbuilding industry, particularly in New England.[22] Some argue that the economic impact was minimal on the colonists,[23][24] but the political friction that the acts triggered was more serious, as the merchants most directly affected were also the most politically active.[25]

The British government lacked the resources and information needed to control the colonies. Instead, British officials negotiated and compromised with colonial leaders to gain compliance with imperial policies. The colonies defended themselves with colonial militias, and the British government rarely sent military forces to America before 1755.[26] According to historian Robert Middlekauff, "Americans had become almost completely self-governing" before the American Revolution, a practice that was consistent with the British monarchy's practice of salutary neglect.[27]

During the French and Indian War (1754–1763), the British government fielded 45,000 soldiers, half British Regulars and half colonial volunteers. The colonies also contributed money to the war effort; however, two-fifths of this spending was reimbursed by the British government. Great Britain defeated France and acquired that nation's territory east of the Mississippi River.[28]

In early 1763, the Bute ministry decided to permanently garrison 10,000 soldiers in North America.[29][30] This would allow approximately 1,500 politically well-connected British Army officers to remain on active duty with full pay (stationing a standing army in Great Britain during peacetime was politically unacceptable).[31] A standing army would provide defense against Native Americans in the west and foreign populations in newly acquired territories (the French in Canada and the Spanish in Florida). In addition, British soldiers could prevent white colonists from instigating conflict with Native Americans and help collect customs duties.[32]

Migration beyond the Appalachian Mountains increased after the French threat was removed, and Native Americans launched Pontiac's War (1763–1766) in response. The Grenville ministry issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763, designating the territory between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River as an Indian Reserve closed to white settlement. The Proclamation failed to stop westward migration while angering settlers, fur traders, and land speculators in the Thirteen Colonies.[33]

